# Measurement-of-latent-signals-in-astronomy-and-psychometric-a-common-model

This work aims to analyze the model used to the detect primordial gravitational – wave background in the presence of astrophysical foregrounds and draw an application in the context of psychometric statistics, identifying differences and similarities with respect to confirmatory factor analysis.

In cosmology, gravitational waves are hypothesized to trace to the moments immediately following the Big Bang. These first primordial gravitational ripples formed in the space – time were immediately amplified by the inflationary processes that caused the exponential expansion of the universe. The so – called primordial gravitational waves, generated almost 13.8 bilion years ago, are masked by gravitational events originated in more recent times, for example from neutron star and black holes mergers.

It is well known that the presence of massive bodies deforms the geometry of space – time and similarly to a trampoline, curved in the presence of matter. In a dynamic situation as the fusion of a binary system, the curvature changes over time. This variation does not occur instantaneously at all points: it propagates under form of perturbations advancing at the speed of light. In essence, gravitational waves communicate to space – time how its curvature must change.
LIGO and VIRGO interferometers almost daily can detect events, but primordial signals are much weaker than those they are currently able to measure; the primordial signals are in fact hidden by other signals from different sources.

In the past, researchers have tried to separate the astrophysical signal in the foreground from the background through subtractive methods, measuring the parameters of each binary system detected with the goal to subtract the gravitational waveform from the data. However, to detect the signal it is necessary that the instruments have a sensitivity such that they can identify and subtract every binary system in the universe. It is practically impossible to remove every waveform from an event, in fact the measure is contaminated by an error systematic. In the next decade there will be more sensitive instruments (The Big Bang Observer BBO) to detect these early ripples.
The statistical model used for the separation of the primordial gravitational signal from the astrophysical foreground is relevant in the context of confirmatory factor analysis for a certain similarity with the measurement of the latent signal.

Confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) is a statistical model belonging to the equations and deals with the relationship between observed measures or indicators (e.g. test items, test scores, behavioral observation scales) and latent variables (factors). An observed variable is an indicator that is used to measure a latent quantity (measuring).

A single stress – related item can’t directly measure anxiety levels; it can still give important clues about the relationship between anxiety and stress. The CFA requires the researcher to present all aspects of the model. Especially, based on the analysis of previous work, he must state how the observed indicators are linked to their latent variables. The uses of CFA are numerous, a notable example is where it is used during the ladder development process to evaluate latent structure of a test or questionnaire with the aim of verifying the number of latent dimensions of one tool (factors) and the item – factor relationship (factor loadings). When the latent structure is multifactor, i.e. composed of two or more factors, the pattern of factors loadings is supported by the CFA will indicate to what extent a test can be assessed using subscales. In this sense, the number of factors is indicative for the number of subscales and the item – factor relationship pattern indicates how the subscales should be evaluated.
This paper aims to describe the methods used for the detection of primordial gravitational waves in the background. Then we describe the properties of the Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) and the definition of the statistical model that is obtained starting from the one used to capture the gravitational waves in the background.
Finally, after have described the main characteristics of the model that has been obtained for the measurement of the signal and noise, I will apply the model to a case study to observe if actually it is able to detect and the distinguish the latent constructs that you want to measure in the ECR, a test used to assess attachment in middle childhood.
